I talked earlier about the challenges of transportation
as the world population grows. More people,
more cars, more material to support those
people needing to go from where it’s produced
to where it is consumed.
Motorcars are a wonderful technology. They
have revolutionized the way we live, but they
are very dangerous machines. Every year, over
one million people are killed by motorcars
and more than a hundred times that number
are injured.
Globally, this is costing the planet nearly
half a trillion dollars every year. For high-income
countries, that’s nearly 2% of their gross
national product. In low or middle-income
countries, that number is smaller, but it’s
growing. And it is a cost of development is
that a larger proportion of your gross national
product is being lost through traffic injuries
and fatalities. If we look at the 10 leading
causes of death in 2002, road traffic injuries
were at number 10.
By the year 2030, it’s predicted they will
have grown to number eight. So while we’ve
done great things for the health of pregnant
women and reduced the incidence of tuberculosis,
the road traffic injuries, the car is going
to kill more and more people on the planet
and that’s a sad thing.
Here is some more statistics, which show by
region the percentage of gross national product
that is lost due to traffic injuries and fatalities.
Now, motorcars are driven by human beings
and human beings are the primary cause for
the motor-vehicle accidents and the fatalities
of 10 million accidents in the United States
each year. Nine and a half million of those
accidents are due to the fault of the drivers.
I rather like the quote here.
Interestingly, most drivers over estimate
their own ability. I particularly like this quote.
It suggests that most American students, 93% of them believe that they are above average drivers
and of course, that’s an impossibility.
The bottom line is human beings are not very
good drivers even if they believe that they
are. Human beings cause accidents which lead
to a large number of injuries and deaths.
This graph here shows the number of fatalities
per 10 thousand vehicles as a function of
time and we can see that over the last 50
years, there’s been steady improvement in
reducing the number of fatalities per car
and it’s due to improvements in car design,
campaigns to stop people driving under the
influence of alcohol, the introduction of
seatbelts and airbags and so on. While the
general improvement is quite welcome, the
sad thing is that there is this plateau, the
rate of change of improvement has really fallen
off and so we’re stuck on this floor. It’s
not at zero. There is this finite number of
accidents that’s going to happen as a fraction
of the number of vehicles on the road.
One consequence of the imperfection of human
drivers is the way that the human-driven cars
interact with one another. The dynamics of
this system is very, very complex and studied
by mathematicians and traffic engineers. As
we increase the density of cars on the road,
the flow rate actually starts to fall off and this is a situation that we’ve all experienced personally.
If I look out and down from my office window,
I see a busy expressway and this is a view
of the expressway when it’s actually quite
congested and not moving particularly quickly.
So the drivers in this situation are thinking
that the traffic is not flowing, that the
road is jammed up, but from my eagle eye view,
I can see that there’s an awful lot of road
that’s got no cars on it and this is another
problem with human drivers, because they’re
not very good, they’ve got quite slow reaction
times really, we need to leave large gaps
in between the cars. It would be much more
efficient if we could pack more cars into
all of that empty space. Human beings with
a poor reaction times mean that we can’t
do that. If we did that, we’ll just have
tons more accidents. But perhaps, if human
beings weren’t driving the cars, if we have
self-driving cars or robotic cars such as
depicted here by one of the Google self-driving
cars, then perhaps things could be better.
What would be the situation for autonomous
cars that were doing some plateauing. That
is we have a groups of eight cars travelling
very closely together and moving down the
road, with this sort of technology, we will
be able to fit a lot more cars on the road.
They travel more smoothly. They travel more
quickly. We could get more cars down existing
roads without having to make them any wider.